to understand the story of rapid jewelry
evolution I need to get an MRI scan of
my skull the information is processed to
create a model in plastic
[Music]
I'm more than a little curious to see
what my own skull looks like I've been
working with bones for twenty years but
this is a first
I'm quite shocked it's so weird to look
at your own skull whilst well whilst
you're still alive I think really even
though I study bones you look in a
mirror and you don't see all these
little lumps or this massive brow Ridge
I apparently have well this quite large
jutting jaw
[Music]
I'm taking my skull to dr. Carolyn Rando
an archaeologist at University College
London who's been conducting some
fascinating research into how human jaws
are adapting to our ever-changing diet
you've got an impressive array of skulls
here Carolyn what can they tell us about
the evolution of our jaws well what we
have here is we have a selection of
skulls going all the way back from
Neanderthal man to cro-magnon and then
medieval London and post medieval London
here and so while these give us a
cross-section of essentially a kind of
human evolutionary history my main
interest is with these two here and what
I found through my research is that jaws
have gotten significantly smaller since
the medieval period up into the modern
period we're talking just several
hundred days here aren't we absolutely
so the medieval period ends in 1550 and
post medieval we're talking seventeen
1800s 1900s when you say the jaws are
changing all right well what's happening
is that for one in this individual we
have what we call an edge to edge bite
which means that his front teeth line up
perfectly top and bottom together and
what we have here is that his top teeth
and his bottom teeth they don't fit
together at all
that's massive Beth closing my net mine
do the same so is that typical of modern
modern man right absolutely and in this
individual here you can see that they
fit together so poorly that I can put an
entire finger in between his upper and
lower teeth how would my diet make my
jaw become smaller through our human
evolution we've had a very specific type
of diet which is lots of rough hard
foods they really look exactly yeah we
really have to chew hard to make our
food work for us and all of that work is
stimulating our jaws to grow it
stimulates our teeth which stimulate the
jaws and in the whole face responds and
kind to these things and so what
happened then is we switched from a very
traditional agriculturalists diet to one
that was soft and sticky and very sweet
and something that's almost identical to
what we have now processed food is
absolutely right we don't have that same
type of inter
action between the food and the jaws
anymore they just tend to become smaller
through inactivity
[Music]